<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The Window</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter Eight</div>
  <h1>The Window</h1>

  <p class="lead">It was the last week of August. Yvette had come down from Edinburgh for the launch of <em>Waves on the Water</em>, and had insisted, against several of Tanya&#8217;s protestations and one quite firm refusal, on buying the wine. It was a good wine, the label set in a typeface Tanya could not fault, which she took as an excellent omen. They sat by the window of the small flat above the typewriter factory, watching the rain conduct itself on the car park with its usual misplaced enthusiasm.</p>

  <p>&#8220;You&#8217;ve been quiet,&#8221; Yvette said.</p>

  <p>&#8220;I&#8217;m always quiet.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;You&#8217;re unusually quiet. There&#8217;s a register of quiet you&#8217;ve been in all evening that I would describe as pointed.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;I&#8217;ve been thinking about leaving,&#8221; she said.</p>

  <p>&#8220;The firm?&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;The firm. The flat. The whole &#8212;&#8221; she gestured at the window &#8212; &#8220;arrangement. I might even move countries.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;And go where, exactly?&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya considered this. &#8220;I haven&#8217;t worked that out yet. Antwerp, possibly, in the first instance.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Yvette looked at her. &#8220;Antwerp.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;It has a typographic history. A serious one.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;People move countries for love,&#8221; Yvette said. &#8220;For work. For tax reasons. They don&#8217;t move countries because the &#8212; what is it &#8212; the kerning is better in Antwerp.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;The kerning is better in Antwerp,&#8221; Tanya said.</p>

  <p>&#8220;I&#8217;m sure it is.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;You&#8217;re not actually going to Antwerp.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;No,&#8221; Tanya said. &#8220;I know.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya turned her glass on its base. The wine, she noticed, was almost exactly the colour of the streetlamps reflected in it, which she considered a pleasing accident.</p>

  <p>&#8220;Is it the work?&#8221; Yvette said.</p>

  <p>&#8220;No. The work has been good. This year, specifically. Better than good.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Then what?&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;You spend a long time getting better at something,&#8221; Tanya said. &#8220;And then you think you may have done the best thing you&#8217;ll do. And you don&#8217;t quite know what to do with that.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Yvette was quiet for a moment. &#8220;So you want to leave before you find out if you&#8217;re right.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya did not answer immediately, which was, Yvette had come to understand, a kind of answer.</p>

  <p>They sat for a while. Below, a man was engaged in a losing battle with an umbrella. It appeared to be winning on points.</p>

  <p>&#8220;I read your book,&#8221; Tanya said, after a pause of the length that in her vocabulary meant <em>I have been thinking about how to say this since before you arrived</em>. &#8220;On the train to Edinburgh, the last time.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;And?&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;I didn&#8217;t lose my place. Not once. The whole way through.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Yvette was quiet for a moment. &#8220;That&#8217;s the typeface you chose, isn&#8217;t it. The new one.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;It is.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Is that &#8212; I mean, is that a good thing? I genuinely cannot tell, with you, whether &#8216;didn&#8217;t lose my place&#8217; is the highest possible praise or merely baseline adequate.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya considered the question with the seriousness it deserved. Below, the umbrella had turned itself inside out. The man holding it had stopped fighting and was simply standing in the rain now, looking at it, with the expression of someone who has just arrived at an important conclusion about the nature of effort.</p>

  <p>&#8220;It&#8217;s the best thing I&#8217;ve done,&#8221; she said. &#8220;In many years.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Yvette refilled both glasses with the quiet efficiency of someone who understood that the moment called for it and was not going to make a speech about it. &#8220;Then you&#8217;re not going anywhere,&#8221; she said. &#8220;You&#8217;re going to stay here. If I have another book in me, I am going to need your help publishing it.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Well...&#8221;</p>

  <p>Outside, the man had abandoned the umbrella entirely. He was walking to a waiting taxi with his hands in his pockets, at a pace that suggested he had decided, somewhere in the last thirty seconds, that being wet was a condition and not a crisis. The umbrella remained on the pavement. The rain continued. No one came back for it.</p>

  <p>Tanya thought about it. Yvette seemed determined. No, a different kind of change was clearly needed.</p>

</body>
</html>
