<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Coming Up for Air</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter Three</div>
  <h1>Coming Up for Air</h1>

  <p class="lead">By the following spring, Tanya had read more first pages than she could count without getting mildly dispirited about it, and had begun &#8212; cautiously at first, then with the tentative confidence of someone testing ice they are fairly sure will hold &#8212; to read second pages. Then thirds. Then, on a long train journey to Edinburgh, an entire chapter without once losing her place or needing to double back. She had marked the occasion by ordering a second coffee, which the buffet car had provided at a temperature suggesting it had been prepared in a previous decade and left to reconsider its options.</p>

  <p>The trick, she had concluded after considerable analysis, was not to slow down. The trick was to find a typeface that did not require her to slow down. She had spent thirty years reading defensively &#8212; braced, always, for the rn that would dissolve into an m, the line-break that would arrive two words early, the descender that would reach down and poke at the ascender below it like a man in a cinema reclining his seat &#8212; without ever having identified this as a problem with the type rather than a problem with herself. This realisation had been both liberating and irritating in roughly equal measure, which Tanya felt was the appropriate response to most significant discoveries.</p>

  <h2>On the Importance of Long Lines</h2>

  <p>A short paragraph, she had come to understand, was a kind of cheat. Three sentences, two hundred words &#8212; any typeface could manage that. The real test was the long sentence: the kind that begins with a clear and confident premise, takes a considered detour through a subordinate clause or two, pauses to acknowledge a counterargument it has no serious intention of engaging with, gestures in the general direction of a supporting example, returns to the main thread with the slightly sheepish air of someone who has been away longer than planned, and finally arrives &#8212; breathless, faintly apologetic, but resolute &#8212; at its verb.</p>

  <p>Such sentences, in a hostile typeface, became a slog. The eye lost its place between one comma and the next; the descenders of the line above tangled with the ascenders of the line below; an <em>m</em> in the middle distance dissolved into what might equally have been an <em>rn</em>, and the reader &#8212; having lost the thread entirely &#8212; was forced back to the beginning of the line with nothing to guide them but a finger and a deteriorating faith in the enterprise.</p>

  <blockquote>&#8220;A book that requires a finger,&#8221; Mr. Trevelyan had once said, looking up briefly from his own immaculate work, &#8220;is a book that has been set without consideration for the person reading it. The page should hold its own line. The reader should hold the book. These are not the same job and should not be performed simultaneously.&#8221;</blockquote>

  <p>In a kinder typeface, the same sentence behaved itself entirely. The line-heights breathed. The letters kept to their lanes with the cheerful good manners of people who have been allocated seats and are content with the arrangement. The reader arrived at the verb on time, and with enough attention remaining to notice that the verb, after all that patient waiting, had in fact been worth it.</p>

  <h2>The Adventures of a Single Sentence</h2>

  <p>Consider, for the purposes of illustration, the following: <em>On the first warm Saturday in April, when the magnolias along the embankment had finally agreed to bloom, and when the ferries on the river were once again carrying passengers who had remembered, after a long winter indoors, that the world contained both water and weather, Yvette walked from her flat in Walworth to the South Bank, intending to buy a coffee and to read, for the third time that month, the opening paragraph of a novel she had been meaning to finish since November.</em></p>

  <p>That sentence, set in a hostile face, is a maze with no guaranteed exit. Set kindly, it is an afternoon walk with excellent company. The words are identical in both cases. What changes is the degree of effort required to believe them.</p>

  <h2>A Field Guide to Common Difficulties</h2>

  <p>Below, a small catalogue of the constructions that, in Tanya&#8217;s experience over thirty years, reliably separated the kind typefaces from the unkind. None of these are exotic. All of them appear, regularly and without warning, in any book worth finishing.</p>

  <div class="kern-grid">
    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Adjacent ascenders</div>
      <div class="kern-row">tall hill bill till lull</div>
      <div class="kern-row">filled killed billed thrilled</div>
      <div class="kern-row">little kettle settle bottle</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Adjacent descenders</div>
      <div class="kern-row">jiggy piggy foggy buggy</div>
      <div class="kern-row">happy puppy poppy guppy</div>
      <div class="kern-row">gypsy pygmy syzygy</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Double letters</div>
      <div class="kern-row">book look took shook</div>
      <div class="kern-row">need feed seed weed</div>
      <div class="kern-row">moon soon spoon balloon</div>
      <div class="kern-row">accommodation embarrassment</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Long words</div>
      <div class="kern-row">institutionalised</div>
      <div class="kern-row">incomprehensibility</div>
      <div class="kern-row">counterrevolutionary</div>
      <div class="kern-row">disestablishmentarian</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Numbers in prose</div>
      <div class="kern-row">In 1987, on the 11th of August, at 14:07, the train from Glasgow arrived 1 hour and 17 minutes late.</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Mixed punctuation</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#8220;Well,&#8221; she said, &#8220;&#8212; if you must &#8212; then yes; but only if it&#8217;s Tuesday.&#8221;</div>
    </div>
  </div>

  <h2>Closing Note</h2>

  <p>Tanya finished her coffee. The ferry crossed. The magnolias, in due course, released their petals onto the embankment, where the wind moved them around in a vaguely purposeful way for a week before the rain arrived and made the whole question moot.</p>

  <p>She went home and read another chapter. The sentences were long. The verb, when it arrived, had been worth it. She did not, this time, need her finger once.</p>

  <div class="footer-meta">&#8212; end of sample &#8212;</div>
</body>
</html>
