<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Foreign Tongues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter <span class="num">Five</span></div>
  <h1>Foreign Tongues</h1>

  <p class="lead">In the spring of 2003, on a Friday, Tanya had taken the night ferry to Hoek van Holland, ridden a bicycle for three days through the polders (a journey she had prepared for by reading a guide to Dutch cycling and had survived by ignoring most of it) and arrived, slightly damp and considerably more determined than when she had left, at a caf&#233; outside Brugge.</p>

  <p>She had attempted, in the French she had assembled from a phrase book and two semesters of evening class, to place her order.</p>
    
  <p>The waiter had listened with the patient amusement of someone who had seen this before, and explained, in English considerably more assured than the French she had just deployed, that this was the Flemish-speaking part of Belgium, where the preferred languages were Dutch and, as she could now plainly hear, English. The name of the dish she had been intending to order had seemed, she reflected, like reasonable grounds for the attempt.</p>

  <p>Tanya had absorbed the correction with the equanimity available to someone who had not yet eaten and was prepared to accept instruction on almost any subject. The menu, set in a typeface designed by someone who regarded diacritics as optional decoration rather than load-bearing structural elements, had read CROQUE-MONS EUR.</p>

  <p>There had been a space where the i should have been. The s and the e, finding themselves separated by an unexpected gap, sat on the page like colleagues who had been introduced at a meeting and discovered they had nothing to say to each other.</p>

  <p>Tanya had stared at it for a moment longer than was strictly necessary, then put it down and looked at the canal instead, where a heron was standing in the shallows with the philosophical composure of something that had long since made its peace with the world and everything in it.</p>

  <p>The croque-monsieur, when it arrived, had been excellent. She had cycled forty kilometres that morning and deserved that croque-monsieur, regardless of how it was spelled or what language she had used to place the order. She had filed this particular embarrassment away under <em>Forget This Please</em>, and then, as was her habit with uncomfortable memories, had actually forgotten about it for a few years.</p>

  <h2>The Accented Alphabet, Visited</h2>

  <p>A tour of the diacritics that distinguish &#233; from a plain <em>e</em>, &#241; from a plain <em>n</em>, and &#229; from an <em>a</em> that has simply given up. A typeface that handles plain ASCII with elegance but trips over its accents is, in the end, a typeface that speaks fluently to half the world and mumbles incoherently at the other half.</p>

  <div class="kern-grid">
    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">French</div>
      <div class="kern-row">caf&#233; &#233;l&#232;ve &#234;tre na&#239;ve fa&#231;ade</div>
      <div class="kern-row">cr&#234;pe d&#233;j&#224;-vu cr&#232;me br&#251;l&#233;e</div>
      <div class="kern-row">l&#8217;&#233;t&#233; o&#249; &#231;a tr&#232;s &#226;me &#244;te</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">German</div>
      <div class="kern-row">M&#252;nchen K&#246;ln Stra&#223;e &#196;pfel</div>
      <div class="kern-row">gr&#252;&#223;en sch&#246;n Br&#252;cke F&#252;&#223;e</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#196; &#214; &#220; &#228; &#246; &#252; &#223;</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Spanish &amp; Portuguese</div>
      <div class="kern-row">a&#241;o ni&#241;o pi&#241;ata Espa&#241;a</div>
      <div class="kern-row">caf&#233; &#225;rbol coraz&#243;n &#250;til</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#231;&#227;o p&#227;o S&#227;o Paulo cora&#231;&#227;o</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Nordic</div>
      <div class="kern-row">fj&#246;rd &#229;sa Bj&#246;rk Sm&#248;rrebr&#248;d</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#198;ble &#216;l Hygge &#197;rhus</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Reykjav&#237;k &#222;ingvellir &#240;</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Eastern European</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Krak&#243;w &#321;&#243;d&#378; &#380;ywiec</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#268;esk&#253; Krumlov D&#345;evnice</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Bratislava Ko&#353;ice &#317;ubo&#269;</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Punctuation &amp; symbols</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#171; bonjour &#187; &#8222;guten Tag&#8220; &#8216;hello&#8217;</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#161;Hola! &#191;C&#243;mo est&#225;s? &#8212; &#8211; &#8230;</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#167; &#182; &#8224; &#8225; &#8226; &#8230; &#8364; &#163; &#165; &#36; &#162;</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#176; &#177; &#215; &#247; &#8722; &#8730; &#8800; &#8804; &#8805;</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Ligatures &amp; specials</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#198;sop &#339;uvre f&#339;tus encyclop&#230;dia</div>
      <div class="kern-row">fi fl ffi ffl &#64257; &#64258;</div>
      <div class="kern-row">na&#239;ve r&#244;le co&#246;perate r&#233;sum&#233;</div>
    </div>
  </div>

  <h2>Closing Note</h2>

  <p>The waiter, that long-ago morning, had brought the sandwich without further discussion. It had been, as noted, excellent. The menu was still wrong when she left. She had looked at it once more on the way out, at the space where the i should have been, and had thought: the sandwich arrived. The heron was still there. The canal was very still.</p>

  <p>It was possible that some things mattered less than she had believed, and that this was not a defeat, but a reclassification.</p>

  <p>She had not, at the time, quite known what to do with this thought. It was the kind that arrives fully formed but waits, sometimes for years, for the right occasion to make itself useful.</p>
</body>
</html>
