<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>A Blank Label</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter <span class="num">Seven</span></div>
  <h1>A Blank Label</h1>

  <p class="lead">The envelope from Mr. Trevelyan arrived: a single sheet, characteristically brief. <em>Waves on the Water</em> had been approved for the spring list. Tanya read it twice, set it down, and looked at the pencilled label in her file drawer for a moment. Then she picked up the telephone.</p>

  <p>Yvette answered on the third ring.</p>

  <p>&#8220;This is Tanya &#8212; from the firm.&#8221; Too formal; she knew it immediately. &#8220;I&#8217;m calling about your manuscript. It&#8217;s been approved.&#8221;</p>

  <p>A pause. &#8220;Oh.&#8221; Then: &#8220;That&#8217;s &#8212; yes. Thank you. That&#8217;s good news.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;We&#8217;re targeting the spring list. I&#8217;ll be handling the typesetting myself.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Right. Yes.&#8221; A pause of a different quality. &#8220;Is that &#8212; do you normally do that? Handle it yourself?&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Not always,&#8221; Tanya said. &#8220;I wanted to.&#8221;</p>

  <p>They discussed the timeline. Tanya mentioned the typeface she had in mind, briefly and professionally. Yvette listened. Then, after a moment:</p>

  <p>&#8220;Did you &#8212; I mean, you&#8217;ve read them. Did you &#8212;&#8221; She stopped.</p>

  <p>&#8220;Yes,&#8221; Tanya said. And then, because it was the accurate thing to say and she had been thinking about how to say it since February: &#8220;They&#8217;re very good.&#8221;</p>

  <p>A beat.</p>

  <p>&#8220;Thank you,&#8221; Yvette said. Then, slightly too quickly: &#8220;I&#8217;ll look forward to seeing the proofs.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;I&#8217;ll send them when they&#8217;re ready.&#8221; A pause. &#8220;I may come up to Edinburgh at some point. During the setting. If that would be useful.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Yes,&#8221; Yvette said. &#8220;That would be useful.&#8221;</p>

  <p>They said goodbye with the slightly careful efficiency of two people who have just said something that requires processing before it can be decided how significant it was.</p>

  <h2>The Right Distance</h2>

  <p>Tracking (distinct from kerning, which operates between specific pairs of letters) is the adjustment of space between all letters uniformly, across a word or a line or a page. Where kerning is a conversation between neighbours, tracking is the room temperature: the ambient distance at which every letter exists relative to every other.</p>

  <p>Set too tight, text closes in on itself. The letters crowd. Words become a single dense shape rather than a sequence of distinct ones, and the eye, denied the small breathing spaces that allow it to parse what it sees, begins to work harder than it should and to trust the page less than it must.</p>

  <p>Set too loose, something different but equally wrong occurs. The letters drift. The words lose their coherence. The eye, navigating the gaps, loses the thread: each letter an island, the sentence an archipelago. Meaning requires proximity. Too much distance, and the connection fails.</p>

  <p>The right tracking is invisible. The letters are present to each other without crowding. The words hold together without gripping. The page breathes, and the reader does not notice, which is the whole point.</p>

  <h2>Tracking in Practice</h2>

  <p>The same text at three different settings. The words are identical in each case. What changes is the degree of effort required to read them, and the degree of trust the reader extends to the page.</p>

  <div class="kern-grid">
    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Too tight</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:-0.05em">Waves on the Water</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:-0.05em">thirty-one short poems</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:-0.05em">The sea kept no record.</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Correct</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Waves on the Water</div>
      <div class="kern-row">thirty-one short poems</div>
      <div class="kern-row">The sea kept no record.</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Too loose</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.15em">Waves on the Water</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.15em">thirty-one short poems</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.15em">The sea kept no record.</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Uppercase &amp; small caps</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.08em">WAVES ON THE WATER</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.08em">SPRING LIST &#8212; APPROVED</div>
      <div class="kern-row" style="letter-spacing:0.08em">TREVELYAN'S TYPE TESTER</div>
    </div>
  </div>

  <h2>Closing Note</h2>

  <p>She made the trip to Edinburgh in March, on a Sunday, on the pretext of reviewing the proofs in person. The proofs could have been posted. She had posted proofs before.</p>

  <p>Yvette met her at the station with the slightly tentative air of someone who has agreed to something without being entirely sure what it was, and they had walked to a caf&#233; on a steep street and talked for three hours about things that were not, for the most part, typography.</p>

  <p>On the train back, Tanya took the pencilled label out of her bag and wrote a new one in ink: <em>Waves on the Water &#8212; ready for press</em>. She put it away. Then she took out a second label and wrote nothing on it for a while, looking out at the dark fields going past.</p>

  <p>She filed it blank. She would know what it was for.</p>
</body>
</html>
