<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>Room to Breathe</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter One</div>
  <h1>Room to Breathe</h1>

  <p class="lead">Tanya had developed, over the course of her career, opinions about kerning so strong and so specific that she had once walked into a cinema, seen the title card, and walked straight back out again. The film had been nominated for several awards. She would never know if it deserved them. The title had been set in a typeface that spaced its capital T so generously that the letter appeared to be standing apart from the rest of the word, like a well-dressed man who has arrived at a party and immediately regretted it.</p>

  <p>She had joined this bizarre company as its typeface designer in the summer of 1989, just as Voyager was making its unhurried way past Neptune &#8212; an event she had marked by setting an entire page of poetry in a face she had designed herself, only to notice at three in the morning that the lowercase f had developed, quite without her permission, a curl at the bottom that made it look, in certain lights, like a very small and very confused question mark. She had destroyed the page. She had started again. By dawn, the f was worse.</p>

  <p>Tanya had been working here, at this peculiar company, for quite a while. Not just as a typeface designer, but also as a book critic. Because at this company, not only did they make special typewriters... they also published specialized editions of particular books. Every once in a while someone would submit a brand new manuscript, which would land on her desk for review. She was a good critic. Her perfection demanded it of her, after all.</p>

  <p>The factory floor contained three machines named, with the optimism of someone who had never spent time with a machine, AVATAR, TITAN, and YETI. YETI had jammed, twice in one month, in a way that sounded less like a mechanical fault and more like a deeply held grievance. Her supervisor, Mr. Trevelyan, kept a mug on his desk that read &#8220;The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog&#8221; in a typeface so immaculately kerned that Tanya had spent more than one lunch break trying to find fault with it, and had gone home faintly depressed. She had never found fault with it. This she considered one of the great unresolved provocations of her professional life.</p>

  <blockquote>&#8220;Type is a voice,&#8221; Mr. Trevelyan had told her on her first day, with the gravity of a man who had been waiting years to say it. &#8220;Every voice needs room to breathe. A voice that doesn&#8217;t understand this &#8212;&#8221; he had paused, to let the silence do some work &#8212; &#8220;is one people stop reading. And a reader who has stopped reading has already left the room.&#8221;</blockquote>

  <p>It was a Thursday. The rain applied itself to the car park with the focused dedication of something that had nowhere else to be. Tanya walked to her desk carrying a slim manuscript &#8212; <em>Waves on the Water</em>, by a poet named Yvette &#8212; and a resolve she had been quietly assembling for months, like a piece of flat-pack furniture she had been afraid to fully build in case she discovered, at the end, that she was missing a crucial piece.</p>

  <h2>A Test for Weary Eyes</h2>

  <p>Before she could bring herself to open the manuscript, she engaged in what she preferred to call professional calibration and what her colleague Brendan called &#8220;the thing you do with your eyes before you do anything.&#8221; She considered the following combinations, each of which had caused her small, specific, unreasonable griefs over the years:</p>

  <div class="pair-test">
    <span>Tag</span><span>Type</span><span>Tune</span><span>AT-AT</span><span>quiT</span>
    <span>Water</span><span>Voyage</span><span>AVATAR</span><span>Yesterday</span>
    <span>Wavy</span><span>AWAY</span><span>To. Va. Ye.</span>
  </div>

  <p>Some of those combinations, in certain typefaces, collided with the alarmed intimacy of strangers sharing an umbrella. Others, in better typefaces, maintained the measured and respectful distance of people who understand that personal space is not merely a social convention but a structural necessity. Tanya believed &#8212; and had believed for some time, with an intensity she acknowledged was not entirely proportionate &#8212; that a letter&#8217;s first obligation was to be itself, completely and without apology, before it attempted to become part of a word.</p>

  <p>She opened the manuscript.</p>

  <p>&#8220;In the evening, by the seawall, we watched the ferry cross toward the far shore. The gulls were loud. The water was not.&#8221;</p>

  <p>The words did not crowd each other. The y did not lean into the w. The T stood like a lighthouse keeper who had been at this particular post for a very long time and had no intention of going anywhere, and what followed it kept a courteous distance, as though aware that some letters prefer it that way. She read to the end of the page. Then she read it again. It was, she realised with a small and private astonishment, the first page she had read all year without her eyes filing a formal complaint.</p>

  <p>She set the manuscript down. She sat for a long moment. Then she went to make herself a cup of tea, which was what Tanya did whenever something had happened that required processing before she could decide how to feel about it.</p>

  <h2>Kerning Pair Reference</h2>

  <p>Common pairs where the difference between good and bad spacing is the difference between reading and suffering. In a well-kerned typeface, the pairs below sit with the ease of old colleagues at a long table; in a careless one, the uppercase combinations in particular will gape like a window someone forgot to close before it rained.</p>

  <div class="kern-grid">
    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Capital + lowercase (diagonal)</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Ta Te Ti To Tu Ty Tw</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Va Ve Vo Vu Vy</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Wa We Wi Wo Wr Wy</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Ya Ye Yo Yu</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Pa Pe Po</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Fa Fe Fi Fo</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Capital + capital</div>
      <div class="kern-row">AT AV AW AY</div>
      <div class="kern-row">TA TV TW TY</div>
      <div class="kern-row">VA VV VW VY</div>
      <div class="kern-row">LT LV LW LY</div>
      <div class="kern-row">FA PA RA</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Lowercase + lowercase</div>
      <div class="kern-row">av aw ay</div>
      <div class="kern-row">va vo vy</div>
      <div class="kern-row">we wa wo</div>
      <div class="kern-row">ye yo</div>
      <div class="kern-row">rn rv ry</div>
      <div class="kern-row">fi fl ff ffi ffl</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Punctuation + letter</div>
      <div class="kern-row">T. T, V. V, W. W, Y. Y,</div>
      <div class="kern-row">&#8220;A &#8220;T &#8220;V &#8220;W &#8220;Y</div>
      <div class="kern-row">A&#8217; L&#8217; P&#8217; R&#8217; T&#8217; V&#8217; W&#8217;</div>
      <div class="kern-row">(A (T (V (W (Y</div>
      <div class="kern-row">-T -V -W -Y f/ /f</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Common words</div>
      <div class="kern-row">The Type Tune Today Twenty</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Voyage Victor Villa Valley</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Water Wave Wyoming Worry</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Yesterday Young Yellow</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Avatar Ava Axiom Always</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Digits + letters</div>
      <div class="kern-row">1,000 2,500 3.14 7,777</div>
      <div class="kern-row">10 11 14 17 27 47 74</div>
      <div class="kern-row">T7 Y1 V4 W2</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Pangram stress test</div>
      <div class="kern-row">The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog.</div>
      <div class="kern-row">Pack my box with five dozen liquor jugs.</div>
      <div class="kern-row">TAXI AVAILABLE &#8212; YAWN, VAN, WAVY</div>
    </div>
  </div>

</body>
</html>
