<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The Breath Between</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter <span class="num">Six</span></div>
  <h1>The Breath Between</h1>

  <p class="lead">Yvette&#8217;s manuscript, when Tanya finally read it all the way through on a rainy Saturday in February, turned out to be neither prose nor reference material but verse: thirty-one short poems on water, weather, and waiting, written by someone who thought quickly and typed slowly and had given up pretending these were the same process. Verse, Tanya realised, was the cruelest test she could have set herself.</p>

  <p>Prose could conceal a multitude of tracking sins behind its long and confident lines and its busy punctuation. Verse had no such defences.</p>

  <p>With its short lines, its deliberate silences, and its carefully considered white space, it stood fully exposed to whatever the typesetter chose to do with it. There was nowhere to hide, and nothing between the poem and the reader but the page itself and the choices made on it.</p>

  <h2>From <em>Waves on the Water</em>, by Yvette</h2>

  <h3 class="poem-title">i. Another Crossing</h3>
  <div class="poem">
    <p class="line">A small boat.</p>
    <p class="line">A wide river.</p>
    <p class="line">The pilot, who has made this crossing</p>
    <p class="line">more times than he has counted,</p>
    <p class="line">lights a cigarette and does not look up.</p>
    <p class="line">The far bank arrives.</p>
    <p class="line">It always does.</p>
  </div>

  <h3 class="poem-title">ii. Tide Table</h3>
  <div class="poem">
    <p class="line">Low at six.</p>
    <p class="line">High at noon.</p>
    <p class="line">Low again before the lamps come on.</p>
    <p class="line">I wrote the times in my notebook</p>
    <p class="line">as though keeping track of something.</p>
    <p class="line">The sea kept no record.</p>
    <p class="line">The sea has never needed to.</p>
  </div>

  <h3 class="poem-title">iii. Nocturne for a Rented Room</h3>
  <div class="poem">
    <p class="line">A wardrobe. A kettle.</p>
    <p class="line">A window that looks at another window</p>
    <p class="line">that looks at this one.</p>
    <p class="line">In the other window: a lamp, a table,</p>
    <p class="line">a hand that moves across a page.</p>
    <p class="line">I watch until the light goes out.</p>
    <p class="line">I have no idea what they were writing.</p>
    <p class="line">I think about it still.</p>
  </div>

  <h2>The Page as the Problem</h2>

  <p>She had read verse before (the firm&#8217;s small-press division produced two or three collections a year, and someone had to assess them) but she had not, in recent memory, read verse that required her to stop and think about how she would set it. The problem with Yvette&#8217;s poems was that they kept interrupting the reading with questions she had no business asking yet.</p>

  <p>The third poem did this to her twice. She had only meant to count its syllables, which was something she did sometimes when calibrating the rhythm of a face against the rhythm of a line. She counted them, and found she had read the poem. She counted them again. She had read it again. She put her pencil down and read it a third time, without counting anything.</p>

  <p>It was, she thought, probably a good poem. She was not well-placed to judge. But she had read it three times, which was more than she could say for most things.</p>

  <p>She found herself working through questions that were not yet hers to answer, the manuscript not having been approved, which she noted and set aside and continued anyway. The short lines would require generous leading: not so much that the poems lost their cohesion, but enough that each line could arrive separately and be received as such.</p>

  <p>A line like <em>the sea kept no record</em> needed room to be a thought before it gave way to the next one. Set too tightly, the poems would become lists. Set too loosely, they would become fragments with nothing to say to each other.</p>

  <p>The difference was approximately one and a half points of leading, which was not a fact she could have explained to anyone outside the profession and which she had arrived at by trying it eleven times on a Sunday afternoon that was, strictly speaking, her own time.</p>

  <p>She was not at all a poet. But she had been sitting with Yvette&#8217;s third poem long enough that something had shifted. She turned to a fresh sheet and wrote the only sentence she knew by heart.</p>

  <div class="poem centred">
    <p class="line">The quick brown fox</p>
    <p class="line">jumps over</p>
    <p class="line">the lazy dog.</p>
  </div>

  <p>She added:</p>

  <div class="poem centred">
    <p class="line">It does not jump well.</p>
    <p class="line">It is not, today, in the mood.</p>
    <p class="line">The dog, for its part,</p>
    <p class="line">does not particularly mind.</p>
  </div>

  <h2>Closing Note</h2>

  <p>She set the manuscript down a few days later, having read it, by her count, three times through and the third poem five times specifically. She had also, by this point, made two pages of typesetting notes that were not, strictly speaking, hers to make.</p>

  <p>The manuscript had not been approved. The decision was not yet hers. She looked at the notes for a moment, then filed them under a label she wrote in pencil, so it could be changed: <em>Waves on the Water</em>.</p>
</body>
</html>
