<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>A Question of Direction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Chapter Two</div>
  <h1>A Question of Direction</h1>

  <p class="lead">Brendan appeared on a Wednesday, which was unusual, as Brendan generally appeared on Thursdays when the coffee machine worked and the building&#8217;s collective mood was statistically more amenable to what he called &#8220;borrowing your professional opinion&#8221; and what Tanya called &#8220;asking me to fix things at short notice.&#8221; He was carrying a paperback he had bought in a hurry at the airport, which was evident from the creased cover and the boarding pass still wedged inside it as a bookmark. He pushed it across the desk. &#8220;Read this paragraph,&#8221; he said. &#8220;Out loud. Don&#8217;t think.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya read. The sentence began with a word she could not, at first, decide upon: was it <em>bog</em> or <em>dog</em>? The b and the d sat side by side on the page like twins arguing about which of them had been born first, each one a precise reflection of the other, neither one prepared to concede the point. She paused. She tried again. She got it wrong, then right, then wrong again, which she felt was not a reflection on her intelligence &#8212; a point she had settled with herself, long ago, and at some cost &#8212; so much as an editorial comment on the font choices of whoever had designed this particular edition.</p>

  <p>&#8220;That,&#8221; Brendan said, &#8220;is what my niece does, too. Quite frequently. She&#8217;s nine. She thinks she&#8217;s stupid. We all know it&#8217;s just dyslexia, but it&#8217;s difficult for her.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;It doesn&#8217;t have to be,&#8221; Tanya said, with the certainty of someone for whom this was not, strictly speaking, a professional opinion.</p>

  <p>&#8220;I&#8217;ve been trying to explain that to her for months,&#8221; Brendan said. &#8220;That it&#8217;s normal, that it doesn&#8217;t mean anything is wrong with her. She doesn&#8217;t believe me. I don&#8217;t think she believes anyone who hasn&#8217;t been there.&#8221;</p>

  <p>Tanya looked at the page for a moment. &#8220;A teacher explained it to me,&#8221; she said. &#8220;She wrote my name out in two different typefaces. In one of them, I could read it without stopping to think. I&#8217;d never done that before.&#8221; She set the book down. &#8220;It&#8217;s why we make these special typewriters, after all.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Would you be willing to meet her?&#8221; Brendan said. &#8220;I think she needs to hear it from someone who actually understands.&#8221;</p>

  <p>&#8220;Yes,&#8221; said Tanya. She picked up the manuscript. &#8220;Bring her on a Thursday.&#8221;</p>

  <h2>The Usual Suspects</h2>

  <p>The mirror letters &#8212; b, d, p, q &#8212; have a long and distinguished history of causing entirely unnecessary trouble. They are, in their bones, the same shape, turned and reflected; and the brain, which has spent its first several years learning that a chair is a chair whether you approach it from the front or the back or at a thirty-degree angle with your eyes half-closed, must suddenly be informed that this particular assumption will not serve it in the alphabet. The brain objects. The brain has a point. The brain is, however, outvoted.</p>

  <blockquote>&#8220;A dog is not a bog. A pig is not a qig. The whole civilised business of reading depends on agreeing that orientation matters &#8212; and the brain, frankly, would rather it didn&#8217;t. This is not a failing of the brain. It is a failing of the situation the brain has found itself in. The appropriate response is a typeface that makes orientation impossible to ignore.&#8221;</blockquote>

  <p>Then there are the cousins: <em>n</em> and <em>u</em>, which are one another upside-down and have been conducting this argument since the invention of moveable type; <em>m</em> and <em>w</em>, which are one another upside-down but larger and more emphatic about it; and the notorious triumvirate of <em>i</em>, <em>l</em>, and <em>1</em>, which in unfortunate typefaces become functionally identical and should not, in Tanya&#8217;s opinion, be permitted to appear within three words of a bank account number. The lowercase <em>a</em> in some sans-serifs, meanwhile, quietly abandons its upper storey and becomes a shape so close to an <em>o</em> that the word &#8220;cat&#8221; begins to look like an accusation.</p>

  <div class="pair-test">
    <span>bad</span><span>dab</span><span>bog</span><span>dog</span><span>pod</span><span>bop</span>
    <span>quip</span><span>quid</span><span>peep</span><span>deed</span>
    <span>nun</span><span>uun</span><span>mum</span><span>wow</span>
  </div>

  <h2>The Heavy Foot</h2>

  <p>One approach &#8212; not a cure, but a considered treatment &#8212; was to give each letter a slightly heavier base. A thicker descender. A sense of gravity, both literal and moral, so that a b, when flipped to make a d, would produce something that looked not like its twin but like something assembled by someone working in the dark. Letters with convictions. Letters that knew which way was up and were prepared to make that knowledge architecturally evident.</p>

  <p>Tanya thought of the old typewriter ribbon &#8212; of the way ink had pooled at the foot of every letter on a wet afternoon, giving each one a small, dependable shadow that was also an anchor. The machines had not set out to solve a problem. They had simply been applying pressure, which, in typography as in certain other fields of endeavour, turned out to be sufficient.</p>

  <h2>A Practical Catalogue</h2>

  <p>She wrote out the troublemakers carefully, the way a doctor might document the symptoms of a persistent and recurring condition: not because the listing would cure anything, but because seeing them clearly was the necessary first step toward not being ambushed by them when it mattered.</p>

  <div class="kern-grid">
    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Mirror pairs</div>
      <div class="kern-row">b d &#160; d b &#160; b d b d</div>
      <div class="kern-row">p q &#160; q p &#160; p q p q</div>
      <div class="kern-row">bd db pq qp bdpq qpdb</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Rotation pairs</div>
      <div class="kern-row">n u &#160; u n &#160; n u n u</div>
      <div class="kern-row">m w &#160; w m &#160; m w m w</div>
      <div class="kern-row">6 9 &#160; 9 6 &#160; 6 9 6 9</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Look-alikes</div>
      <div class="kern-row">I l 1 i &#160; Il1i Il1i</div>
      <div class="kern-row">O 0 o &#160; O0o O0o</div>
      <div class="kern-row">rn m &#160; cl d &#160; vv w</div>
    </div>

    <div class="kern-group"><div class="kern-label">Tricky words</div>
      <div class="kern-row">bed bid bud dab dub deb</div>
      <div class="kern-row">pop pup pip dad did dud</div>
      <div class="kern-row">quip quid quod quad quack</div>
      <div class="kern-row">muddle puddle bubble dabble</div>
    </div>
  </div>

  <h2>Closing Note</h2>

  <p>The afternoon ran itself quietly into the early evening without anyone noticing. Brendan gathered his things, and left the paperback on the desk. Tanya kept it open to the first page, where the b and the d continued their ancient argument, unresolved and apparently perfectly content to remain that way.</p>
</body>
</html>
