<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The Sign in the Window</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Epilogue</div>
  <h1>The Sign in the Window</h1>

<p class="lead">Tanya had been visiting Antwerp for a week when she saw the sign.</p>

<p>She had come over on the ferry the previous Tuesday, partly for a change of scene and partly because the book launch had gone well enough to warrant a small celebration, and Yvette had insisted, with the quiet determination of someone who had learned over the course of their friendship when to stop asking and simply to book the tickets. She had spent the intervening days walking the city in the particular way she always approached new places &#8212; slowly, with particular attention to signage &#8212; and had found, to her private satisfaction, that the kerning on the municipal wayfinding was indeed as excellent as she had claimed. Mr. Trevelyan would have approved, though he would not have said so. She would not have told him. He would already know.</p>

<p>The flat she had rented for the week was above a dry-cleaner&#8217;s, close to the river. The light, as advertised, was excellent &#8212; a particular quality of northern European morning light that arrived at an angle through the tall windows and made the dust look intentional. She had set up her workbench facing it. She had spent her first week doing almost nothing at all, which was the most productive she had felt in years. She had set two book covers, read four manuscripts, and written a long letter to Brendan in a typeface she had chosen specifically because it was warm without being cloying, which Brendan was not, and which she hoped he would notice.</p>

  <p>She had been walking to the bakery &#8212; a route she had chosen partly for the bread and partly because a particular stretch of canal caught the morning light in a way that made her feel, each time she passed it, as though she had arrived somewhere important &#8212; when she saw it.</p>

  <p>It was in the window of a dry-cleaner&#8217;s. A small notice, printed on a home printer, announcing a two-week closure for the owner&#8217;s holiday. The dates were clear. The phone number was legible. The message was cheerful and, by any practical measure, entirely successful.</p>

  <p>The typeface was Comic Sans.</p>

  <p>Tanya stopped walking.</p>

  <p>For a moment, nothing happened. She stood on the pavement and waited, with the patience of long habit, for the familiar response: the slight tightening behind the eyes, the small internal voice that would begin, as it always did, to itemise its objections. The rounded, self-satisfied letterforms. The irregular spacing. The cheerful and comprehensive indifference to everything she had spent thirty years caring about with considerable personal cost.</p>

  <p>But the voice did not come.</p>

  <p>She looked at the sign. It told her the shop would be closed until the twenty-second. It told her this clearly, in a typeface that someone had chosen because it was there, and because it was friendly, and because on a Tuesday afternoon with a holiday to pack for and a sign to tape to a window, it had seemed like exactly the right tool for the job. And it had been. She had read it in less than four seconds. She had understood it completely. Her day would now proceed accordingly, which was the entire point.</p>

  <p>There was a phone number for urgent enquiries. The digits were well-spaced. The kerning, she noticed almost despite herself, was not actually an issue: Comic Sans had never been shy about giving its characters room to breathe. This was not, she supposed, a coincidence. The person who had designed it had wanted people to read it. And people had. For thirty years, on birthday cards and school posters and notices in dry-cleaner&#8217;s windows, people had read it without losing their place, without needing their finger, without filing a formal complaint with their eyes.</p>

  <p>She stood on the pavement for a moment longer.</p>

  <p>Mr. Trevelyan had told her, on her first day, that type was a voice and that every voice needed room to breathe. She had spent thirty years taking this as a lesson in spacing &#8212; in the precise and measurable distance between letters. But standing here, on a pavement in Antwerp, in front of a sign that had no business working and worked perfectly, she wondered if he had meant something simpler than that. Something she had been too busy perfecting things to notice.</p>

  <p>Sometimes, it was about the message.</p>

  <p>The shop was closed until the twenty-second. She knew this now. The sign had done everything that had ever been asked of type, in any face, in any size, across the entire history of the written word. It had carried a thought from one person to another. The rest, perhaps, was refinement.</p>

  <p>Tanya walked on to the bakery. She bought bread. She walked back along the canal. The light on the water was doing the thing it did at nine in the morning that made her feel she had arrived somewhere important.</p>

  <p>She thought she probably had.</p>

  <div class="footer-meta">&#8212; fin &#8212;</div>
</body>
</html>
