<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <title>The Firm</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="styles.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <div class="chapter-num">Prologue</div>
  <h1>The Firm</h1>

  <p class="lead">Trevelyan &amp; Co. designed typefaces and, through its small-press division, published books set in them, an arrangement Mr. Trevelyan considered so obviously correct that he rarely bothered to defend it, in much the same way that he did not defend the usefulness of windows, decent tea, or the avoidance of badly spaced capitals.</p>

  <p>The firm occupied a building whose chief architectural distinction was that no one looking at it from the street would have guessed, correctly or otherwise, what went on inside, which suited Mr. Trevelyan perfectly well.</p>

  <p>Within were proofs pinned to walls, drawers full of rejected alphabets, invoices of uncertain legibility, and three machines named AVATAR, TITAN, and YETI. Mr. Trevelyan had chosen those names on a whim, with the remarkable optimism of someone who had never spent much time thinking about the implications of assigning the names of frightening creatures to large and temperamental machines.</p>

  <p>Mr. Trevelyan held, with unembarrassed seriousness, that type was not decoration but voice, and that a voice badly set was a kind of discourtesy.</p>

  <p>Manuscripts and books passed through the place with differing degrees of promise. Some merely required sympathy, better spacing, and a firm refusal to let the lowercase l resemble the numeral 1 in any context involving money.</p>

  <p>A very few required something more difficult. When such things arrived, they generally found their way to Tanya, whose desk stood at the point where design, typesetting, and reading had, over the years, agreed to meet and remain.</p>
</body>
</html>
